भारतीय ǐरज़वर् बɇक 
----------------------------------- RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ------------------------------------- 
www.rbi.org.in 
ͪवत् तीय समावेशन और ͪवकास ͪवभाग, केन्द्रȣय कायार्लय,10 वी मंिजल, कɅ द्रȣय कायार्लय भवन, शहȣद भगतͧसंह मागर्,पोस्ट बॉक्स सं. 10014,मुंबई -400001 
Financial Inclusion & Development Dept.,Central Office,10th Floor, Central Office Building,Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg,P.B.No.10014,Mumbai-1 
टेलȣ Tel:022-22601000 फैक्सः 91-22-22621011/22610943/22610948 ई -मेल : cgmincfidd@rbi.org.in 
Ǒहंदȣ आसान है,इसका प्रयोग बढ़ाइए। 
 “चेतावनी : 
-
मेल
 
ǐरज़वर् बɇक द्वारा
 
 
डाक, एसएमएस या फोन कॉल के जǐरए ͩकसी कȧ भी व् यिक्तगत जानकारȣ जैसे बɇक के खाते का ब् यौरा, पासवडर् आǑद नहȣं मांगी जाती 
है। यह धन रखने या देने का प्रस् ताव भी नहȣं करता है। ऐसे प्रस् तावɉ का ͩकसी भी तरȣके से जवाब मत दȣिजए।" 
Caution: RBI never sends mails, SMSs or makes calls asking for personal information like bank account details, passwords, etc. It never 
keeps or offers funds to anyone. Please do not respond in any manner to such offers. 
 
RBI/2017-18/14 
FIDD.CO.SFB. No.9/04.09.001/2017-18 July 6, 2017 
 
The Chairman/ Managing Director/ 
Chief Executive Officer 
Small Finance Banks 
Dear Sir/Madam, 
Small Finance Banks – Compendium of Guidelines on Financial Inclusion and 
Development 
In view of the announcement made in the budget 2014-15 regarding creation of a framework 
for licensing small banks, and to give a thrust to the supply of credit to micro and small 
enterprises, agriculture and banking services in unbanked and under-banked regions in the 
country, Reserve Bank decided to licence new “Small Finance Banks (SFBs)” in the private 
sector. Following a due process, in-principle approvals were given to ten applicants to set up 
SFBs vide press release dated September 16, 2015. 
 
2. Subsequently, Operating Guidelines for Small Finance Banks were issued vide Circular 
DBR.NBD.No.26/16.13.218/2016-17 dated October 6, 2016, which prescribed, inter alia, 
broad indicative guidelines in areas related to Financial Inclusion and Development. In 
continuation with the same, comprehensive set of guidelines in the form of a compendium is 
Annexed. The guidelines are operational with effect from the date of this compendium. 
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
(Uma Shankar) 
Chief General Manager-In-Charge 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Compendium of Guidelines for Small Finance Banks – Financial Inclusion 
and Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA 
FINANCIAL INCLUSION AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 

 
INDEX 
Chapter 
Particulars 
Page No. 
1. 
Preliminary 
12. 
Priority Sector Lending 
23. 
Lending to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
18 
4. 
Financial Literacy 
28 
5. 
Financial Inclusion 
30 
6. 
Farm Sector 
34 
7. 
Lead Bank Scheme 
58 
8. 
Government Sponsored Schemes 
59 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I: PRELIMINARY 
Objective of a small finance bank 
The objective of setting up of small finance banks is to further financial inclusion by, 
a) provision of savings vehicle and primarily to unserved and underserved sections of 
the population and, 
b) supply of credit to small business units, small & marginal farmers; micro and small 
industries and other unorganised sector entities through high technology & low cost 
operations 
Scope of activities 
• 
The scope of activities of a small finance bank would primarily be to undertake basic 
banking activities of acceptance of deposits and lending to unserved and 
underserved sections including small business units, small and marginal farmers, 
micro and small industries and unorganized sector entities. 
• 
SFBs are required to open at least 25% of its branches in unbanked rural centres. 
• 
Further, these banks are required to extend 75% of its ANBC to priority sector. 
Guidelines for SFBs on Financial Inclusion and Development 
• 
Considering the differentiated nature of business and financial focus of the SFBs 
and taking into account the important role that SFBs can play in the supply of credit 
to micro and small enterprises, agriculture and banking services the need for a 
specific compendium of guidelines for SFBs on areas relating to Financial Inclusion 
and Development have been prepared. 
• 
The provisions of these instructions shall apply to every Small Finance Bank 
licensed to operate in India by the Reserve Bank of India. 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
CHAPTER II: PRIORITY SECTOR LENDING – TARGETS AND 
CLASSIFICATION 
SECTION – I Categories Under Priority Sector 
1. The categories under priority sector are as follows: 
i. 
Agriculture 
ii. 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
iii. 
Export Credit 
iv. 
Education 
v. 
Housing 
vi. 
Social Infrastructure 
vii. Renewable Energy 
viii. Others 
The details of eligible activities under the above categories are specified in Section III. 
SECTION – II. Targets /Sub-Targets For Priority Sector 
Small Finance Banks will have a target of 75 per cent for priority sector lending of their 
Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC). While 40 per cent of ANBC should be allocated to 
different sub-sectors under PSL as mentioned below, the balance 35 per cent can be 
allocated to any one or more sub-sectors under the PSL, where the banks have competitive 
advantage. 
Categories 
Target 
Total Priority Sector 
75 percent of ANBC 
Agriculture 
18 percent of ANBC 
Small and Marginal Farmers 
Within the 18 percent target for 
Agriculture, a target of 8 percent of 
ANBC is prescribed for Small and 
Marginal Farmers. 
Micro Enterprises 
7.5 percent of ANBC 
Advances to Weaker Sections 
10 percent of ANBC 
The computation of priority sector targets/sub-targets achievement will be based on the total 
ANBC as on the corresponding date of the preceding year. 

 
3 
 
For the purpose of priority sector lending, ANBC denotes the outstanding Bank Credit in 
India [As prescribed in item No.VI of Form ‘A’ under Section 42 (2) of the RBI Act, 1934] 
minus bills rediscounted with RBI and other approved Financial Institutions plus permitted 
non-SLR bonds/debentures under Held to Maturity (HTM) category plus other investments 
eligible to be treated as part of priority sector lending (e.g. investments in securitized assets). 
The outstanding deposits under RIDF and other funds with NABARD, NHB, SIDBI and 
MUDRA Ltd. in lieu of non-achievement of priority sector lending targets/sub-targets will form 
part of ANBC. Advances extended in India against the incremental FCNR (B)/NRE deposits, 
qualifying for exemption from CRR/SLR requirements, as per the Reserve Bank’s circulars 
DBOD.No.Ret.BC.36/12.01.001/2013-14 
dated 
August 
14, 
2013 
read 
with 
DBOD.No.Ret.BC.93/12.01.001/2013-14 dated January 31, 2014 and DBOD mailbox 
clarification issued on February 6, 2014 will be excluded from the ANBC for computation of 
priority sector lending targets, till their repayment. The eligible amount for exemption on 
account of issuance of long-term bonds for infrastructure and affordable housing as per 
Reserve Bank’s circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.25/08.12.014/2014-15 dated July 15, 2014 will 
also be excluded from the ANBC for computation of priority sector lending targets. 
Computation of Adjusted Net Bank Credit: 
Bank Credit in India [As prescribed in item No.VI of Form ‘A’ under Section 42 (2) of 
the RBI Act, 1934] 
I 
Bills Rediscounted with RBI and other approved Financial Institutions 
II 
Net Bank Credit (NBC)* 
III (I-II) 
Bonds / debentures in non-SLR categories under HTM category + other investments 
eligible to be treated as priority sector + Outstanding Deposits under RIDF and other 
eligible funds with NABARD, NHB, SIDBI and MUDRA Ltd. on account of priority 
sector shortfall + outstanding PSLCs 
IV 
Eligible amount for exemptions on issuance of long-term bonds for infrastructure and 
affordable housing as per circular DBOD.BP.BC.No.25/05.12.014/2014-15 dated 
July 15, 2014 
V 
Eligible advances extended in India against the incremental FCNR (B) / NRE 
deposits, qualifying for exemption from CRR/SLR requirements 
VI 
ANBC 
III+IV-V-VI 
*For the purpose of priority sector computation only, Banks should not deduct / net any 
amount like provisions, accrued interest, etc. from NBC. 

 
4 
 
Banks may be further guided by Para 6.5 (ii to vii) of the Operating Guidelines for Small 
Finance 
Banks 
issued 
by 
Department 
of 
Banking 
Regulation 
(RBI/2016-17/81 
DBR.NBD.No.26/16.13.218/2016-17 dated October 06, 2016) for computation of ANBC. 
In case banks are subtracting prudential write off at Corporate / Head Office level while 
reporting Bank Credit as above, it must be ensured that bank credit to priority sector and all 
other sub-sectors so written off should also be subtracted category wise from priority sector 
and sub-sector achievement. 
All types of loans, investments or any other items which are treated as eligible for 
classification under priority sector target / sub-target achievement should also form part of 
Adjusted Net Bank Credit. 
SECTION – III. Description Of Eligible Categories Under Priority Sector 
 
1. Agriculture 
The lending to agriculture sector will be categorized as (i) Farm Credit (which will include 
short-term crop loans and medium/long-term credit to farmers) (ii) Agriculture Infrastructure 
and (iii) Ancillary Activities. A list of eligible activities under the three sub-categories is 
indicated below: 
 
1.1 Farm credit 
 
A. Loans to individual farmers [including Self Help Groups 
(SHGs) or Joint Liability Groups (JLGs), i.e. groups of individual 
farmers, provided banks maintain disaggregated data of such 
loans], 
directly 
engaged 
in 
Agriculture 
and 
Allied 
Activities, viz., dairy, fishery, animal husbandry, poultry, bee-
keeping and sericulture. This will include: 
(i) Crop loans to farmers which will include traditional/non-
traditional plantations and horticulture, and, loans for allied 
activities. 
(ii) Medium and long-term loans to farmers for agriculture and 
allied activities (e.g. purchase of agricultural implements and 
machinery, loans for irrigation and other developmental activities 
undertaken in the farm, and developmental loans for allied 
activities.) 
(iii) Loans to farmers for pre and post-harvest activities, viz., 

 
5 
 
spraying, weeding, harvesting, sorting, grading and transporting 
of their own farm produce. 
(iv) 
Loans 
to 
farmers 
up 
to 
₹50 
lakh 
against 
pledge/hypothecation 
of 
agricultural 
produce 
(including 
warehouse receipts) for a period not exceeding 12 months. 
(v) Loans to distressed farmers indebted to non-institutional 
lenders. 
(vi) Loans to farmers under Kisan Credit Card Scheme. 
(vii) Loans to small and marginal farmers for purchase of land for 
agricultural purposes. 
B. 
Loans 
to 
corporate 
farmers, 
farmers' 
producer 
organizations/companies of individual farmers, partnership firms 
and co-operatives of farmers directly engaged in Agriculture and 
Allied Activities, viz., dairy, fishery, animal husbandry, poultry, 
bee-keeping and sericulture up to an aggregate limit of ₹2 crore 
per borrower. This will include: 
(i) Crop loans to farmers which will include traditional/non-
traditional plantations and horticulture, and, loans for allied 
activities. 
(ii) Medium and long-term loans to farmers for agriculture and 
allied activities (e.g. purchase of agricultural implements and 
machinery, loans for irrigation and other developmental activities 
undertaken in the farm, and developmental loans for allied 
activities.) 
(iii) Loans to farmers for pre and post-harvest activities, viz., 
spraying, weeding, harvesting, sorting, grading and transporting 
of their own farm produce. 
(iv) Loans up to ₹50 lakh against pledge/hypothecation of 
agricultural produce (including warehouse receipts) for a period 
not exceeding 12 months. 
1.2. 
Agriculture 
infrastructure 
i) Loans for construction of storage facilities (warehouses, 
market yards, godowns and silos) including cold storage units/ 
cold 
storage 
chains 
designed 
to 
store 
agriculture 
produce/products, irrespective of their location. 
ii) Soil conservation and watershed development. 

 
6 
 
iii) Plant tissue culture and agri-biotechnology, seed production, 
production of bio-pesticides, bio-fertilizer, and vermi composting. 
For the above loans, an aggregate sanctioned limit of ₹100 crore 
per borrower from the banking system, will apply. 
1.3.Ancillary 
activities 
(i) Loans up to ₹5 crore to co-operative societies of farmers for 
disposing of the produce of members. 
 (ii) Loans for setting up of Agriclinics and Agribusiness Centres. 
(iii) Loans for Food and Agro-processing up to an aggregate 
sanctioned limit of ₹100 crore per borrower from the banking 
system. 
(iv) Loans to Custom Service Units managed by individuals, 
institutions or organizations who maintain a fleet of tractors, 
bulldozers, well-boring equipment, threshers, combines, etc., 
and undertake farm work for farmers on contract basis. 
(v) Outstanding deposits under RIDF and other eligible funds 
with NABARD on account of priority sector shortfall. 
 
For the purpose of computation of 8 percent target, Small and Marginal Farmers will include 
following:- 
- 
Farmers with landholding of up to 1 hectare are considered as Marginal Farmers. 
Farmers with a landholding of more than 1 hectares and up to 2 hectares are 
considered as Small Farmers. 
- 
Landless agricultural laborers, tenant farmers, oral lessees and share-croppers, 
whose share of landholding is within the limits prescribed for small and marginal 
farmers. 
- 
Loans to Self Help Groups (SHGs) or Joint Liability Groups (JLGs), i.e. groups of 
individual Small and Marginal farmers directly engaged in Agriculture and Allied 
Activities provided banks maintain disaggregated data of such loans. 
- 
Loans to farmers’ producer companies of individual farmers, and co-operatives of 
farmers directly engaged in Agriculture and Allied Activities, where the membership 
of Small and Marginal Farmers is not less than 75 per cent by number and whose 
land-holding share is also not less than 75 per cent of the total land-holding. 
 
 
 

 
72. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
2.1. The limits for investment in plant and machinery/equipment for manufacturing / service 
enterprise, as notified by Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, vide S.O.1642(E) 
dated September 9, 2006 are as under:- 
Manufacturing Sector 
Enterprises 
Investment in plant and machinery 
Micro Enterprises 
Does not exceed twenty five lakh rupees 
Small Enterprises 
More than twenty five lakh rupees but does 
not exceed five crore rupees 
Medium Enterprises 
More than five crore rupees but does not 
exceed ten crore rupees 
Service Sector 
Enterprises 
Investment in equipment 
Micro Enterprises 
Does not exceed ten lakh rupees 
Small Enterprises 
More than ten lakh rupees but does not 
exceed two crore rupees 
Medium Enterprises 
More than two crore rupees but does not 
exceed five crore rupees 
 
Bank loans to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, for both manufacturing and service 
sectors are eligible to be classified under the priority sector as per the following norms: 
2.2. Manufacturing Enterprises 
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of 
goods to any industry specified in the first schedule to the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 and as notified by the Government from time to time. The 
Manufacturing Enterprises are defined in terms of investment in plant and machinery. 
2.3. Service Enterprises 
Bank loans up to 5 crore per unit to Micro and Small Enterprises and 10 crore to Medium 
Enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services and defined in terms of investment 
in equipment under MSMED Act, 2006. 
2.4. Factoring Transactions 
Factoring transactions on ‘with recourse’ basis by banks which carry out the business of 
factoring departmentally, wherever the ‘assignor’ is a Micro, Small or Medium Enterprise, 

 
8 
 
subject to the corresponding limits for investment in plant and machinery/ equipment and 
other extant guidelines for priority sector classification. Such outstanding factoring portfolios 
may be classified by banks under MSME category on the reporting dates. 
 
In terms of paragraph 9 of the Department of Banking Regulation Circular DBR. No. 
FSD.BC.32/24.01.007/2015-16 dated July 30, 2015 on ‘Provision of Factoring Services by 
Banks- Review’, inter-alia, the borrower’s bank shall obtain from the borrower, periodical 
certificates regarding factored receivables to avoid double financing/ counting. Further, the 
‘factors’ must intimate the limits sanctioned to the borrower and details of debts factored to 
the banks concerned, taking responsibility to avoid double financing. 
 
Factoring transactions taking place through the Trade Receivables Discounting System 
(TReDS) shall also be eligible for classification under priority sector. 
 
2.5. Khadi and Village Industries Sector (KVI) 
All loans to units in the KVI sector will be eligible for classification under the sub-target of 7.5 
per cent prescribed for Micro Enterprise under priority sector. 
2.6. Other Finance to MSMEs 
I. 
Loans to entities involved in assisting the decentralized sector in the supply of inputs 
to and marketing of outputs of artisans, village and cottage industries. 
II. 
Loans to co-operatives of producers in the decentralized sector viz. artisans, village 
and cottage industries. 
III. 
Credit outstanding under General Credit Cards (including Artisan Credit Card, Laghu 
Udyami Card, Swarojgar Credit Card, and Weaver’s Card etc. in existence and 
catering to the non-farm entrepreneurial credit needs of individuals). 
IV. 
Overdrafts extended by banks after April 8, 2015 upto ₹ 5000/- under Pradhan Mantri 
Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) accounts provided the borrower’s household annual 
income does not exceed ₹ 100,000/- for rural areas and ₹ 160,000/- for non-rural 
areas. These overdrafts will qualify as achievement of the target for lending to Micro 
Enterprises. 
V. 
Outstanding deposits with SIDBI and MUDRA Ltd. on account of priority sector 
shortfall. 
 

 
92.7. To ensure that MSMEs do not remain small and medium units merely to remain eligible 
for priority sector status, the MSME units will continue to enjoy the priority sector lending 
status up to three years after they grow out of the MSME category concerned. 
 
3. Export Credit 
During the first financial year of operation, Export Credit subject to a limit of up to ₹ 25 crore 
per borrower to units having turnover of up to ₹ 100 crore will be classified as priority sector. 
However, for subsequent financial years only incremental export credit over corresponding 
date of the preceding year, up to 2 percent of ANBC shall be treated as priority sector. 
 
Export credit includes pre-shipment and post-shipment export credit (excluding off-balance 
sheet items) as defined in Master Circular on Rupee/Foreign Export Credit and Customer 
Service to Exporters issued by our Department of Banking Regulation. 
 
4. Education 
Loans to individuals for educational purposes including vocational courses upto ₹10 lakh 
irrespective of the sanctioned amount will be considered as eligible for priority sector. 
5. Housing 
i. 
Loans to individuals up to ₹28 lakh in metropolitan centres (with population of ten 
lakh and above) and loans up to ₹ 20 lakh in other centres for purchase / 
construction of a dwelling unit per family provided the overall cost of the dwelling unit 
in the metropolitan centre and at other centres should not exceed ₹ 35 lakh and ₹ 25 
lakh, respectively. The housing loans to banks’ own employees will be excluded. As 
housing loans which are backed by long term bonds are exempted from ANBC, 
banks should either include such housing loans to individuals up to ₹ 28 lakh in 
metropolitan centres and ₹ 20 lakh in other centres under priority sector or take 
benefit of exemption from ANBC, but not both. 
ii. 
Loans for repairs to damaged dwelling units of families up to ₹ 5 lakh in metropolitan 
centres and up to ₹ 2 lakh in other centres. 
iii. 
Bank loans to any governmental agency for construction of dwelling units or for slum 
clearance and rehabilitation of slum dwellers subject to a ceiling of ₹10 lakh per 
dwelling unit. 
iv. 
The loans sanctioned by banks for housing projects exclusively for the purpose of 
construction of houses for economically weaker sections and low income groups, the 
total cost of which does not exceed ₹10 lakh per dwelling unit. For the purpose of 

 
10 
 
identifying the economically weaker sections and low income groups, the family 
income limit of ₹2 lakh per annum, irrespective of the location, is prescribed. 
v. 
Outstanding deposits with NHB on account of priority sector shortfall. 
 
6. Social Infrastructure 
Bank loans up to a limit of 5 crore per borrower for building social infrastructure for activities 
namely schools, health care facilities, drinking water facilities, sanitation facilities, 
construction/refurbishment of household toilets and household water quality improvements in 
Tier II to Tier VI centres. 
 
7. Renewable Energy 
Bank loans up to a limit of 15 crore to borrowers for purposes like solar based power 
generators, biomass based power generators, wind mills, micro-hydel plants and for non-
conventional energy based public utilities viz. street lighting systems, and remote village 
electrification. For individual households, the loan limit will be 10 lakh per borrower. 
 
8. Others 
8.1. Loans not exceeding ₹50,000/- per borrower provided directly by banks to individuals 
and their SHG/JLG, provided the individual borrower’s household annual income in rural 
areas does not exceed ₹100,000/- and for non-rural areas it does not exceed ₹1,60,000/-. 
 
8.2. Loans to distressed persons [other than farmers already included under III (1.1) A (v)] 
not exceeding ₹100,000/- per borrower to prepay their debt to non-institutional lenders. 
 
8.3 Loans sanctioned to State Sponsored Organizations for Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled 
Tribes for the specific purpose of purchase and supply of inputs and/or the marketing of the 
outputs of the beneficiaries of these organizations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
11 
 
SECTION – IV. Weaker Sections 
 
9. Priority sector loans to the following borrowers will be considered under Weaker Sections 
category:- 
 
No. 
Category 
(i) 
Small and Marginal Farmers 
(ii) 
Artisans, village and cottage industries where individual credit limits do not exceed ₹1 
lakh 
(iii) 
Beneficiaries under Government Sponsored Schemes such as National Rural 
Livelihood Mission (NRLM), National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM) and Self 
Employment Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS) 
(iv) 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
(v) 
Beneficiaries of Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) scheme 
(vi) 
Self Help Groups 
(vii) 
Distressed farmers indebted to non-institutional lenders 
(viii) Distressed persons other than farmers, with loan amount not exceeding ₹1 lakh per 
borrower to prepay their debt to non-institutional lenders 
(ix) 
Individual women beneficiaries up to ₹1 lakh per borrower 
(x) 
Persons with disabilities 
(xi) 
Overdrafts upto₹5,000/- under Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) accounts, 
provided the borrowers’ household annual income does not exceed ₹100,000/- for 
rural areas and ₹1,60,000/- for non-rural areas 
(xii) 
Minority communities as may be notified by Government of India from time to time 
In States, where one of the minority communities notified is, in fact, in majority, item (xii) will 
cover only the other notified minorities. These States/ Union Territories are Jammu & 
Kashmir, Punjab, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Lakshadweep. 
SECTION V. Miscellaneous 
10. Investments by banks in securitised assets 
(i) Investments by banks in securitised assets, representing loans to various categories of 
priority sector, except 'others' category, subject to terms and conditions specified in Para 1.9 
of the Operating Guidelines for Small Finance Banks issued by Department of Banking 

 
12 
 
Regulation (RBI/2016-17/81 DBR.NBD.No.26/16.13.218/2016-17 dated October 06, 2016) 
are eligible for classification under respective categories of priority sector depending on the 
underlying assets provided: 
• 
The securitized assets are originated by banks and financial institutions and are 
eligible to be classified as priority sector advances prior to securitization and fulfil the 
Reserve Bank of India guidelines on securitization. 
• 
The all-inclusive interest charged to the ultimate borrower by the originating entity 
should not exceed the MCLR of the investing small finance bank plus 8 percent per 
annum. 
• 
The investments in securitized assets originated by MFIs, which comply with the 
guidelines in Paragraph 19 of the Master Direction-Priority Sector Lending-
RBI/FIDD/2016-17/33 FIDD.CO.Plan.1/04.09.01/2016-17 dated July 07, 2016 are 
exempted from this interest cap as there are separate caps on margin and interest 
rate. 
(ii) Investments made by banks in securitised assets originated by NBFCs, where the 
underlying assets are loans against gold jewellery, are not eligible for priority sector status. 
11. Transfer of Assets through Direct Assignment /Outright purchases 
(i) Assignments/Outright purchases of pool of assets by banks representing loans under 
various categories of priority sector, except the 'others' category, subject to terms and 
conditions specified in Para 1.9 of the Operating Guidelines for Small Finance Banks issued 
by Department of Banking Regulation (RBI/2016-17/81 DBR.NBD.No.26/16.13.218/2016-17 
dated October 06, 2016) will be eligible for classification under respective categories of 
priority sector provided: 
• 
The assets are originated by banks and financial institutions which are eligible to be 
classified as priority sector advances prior to the purchase and fulfil the Reserve 
Bank of India guidelines on outright purchase/assignment. 
• 
The eligible loan assets so purchased should not be disposed of other than by way of 
repayment. 
• 
The all-inclusive interest charged to the ultimate borrower by the originating entity 
should not exceed the MCLR of the purchasing small finance bank plus 8 percent per 
annum. 

 
13 
 
The Assignments/Outright purchases of eligible priority sector loans from MFIs, which 
comply with the guidelines in Paragraph 19 of the Master Direction-Priority Sector Lending-
RBI/FIDD/2016-17/33 FIDD.CO.Plan.1/04.09.01/2016-17 dated July 07, 2016 are exempted 
from this interest rate cap as there are separate caps on margin and interest rate. 
(ii) When the banks undertake outright purchase of loan assets from banks/ financial 
institutions to be classified under priority sector, they must report the nominal amount 
actually disbursed to end priority sector borrowers and not the premium embedded amount 
paid to the sellers. 
(iii) Purchase/ assignment/investment transactions undertaken by banks with NBFCs, where 
the underlying assets are loans against gold jewellery, are not eligible for priority sector 
status. 
12. Inter Bank Participation Certificates 
Inter Bank Participation Certificates (IBPCs) bought by banks, on a risk sharing basis, are 
eligible for classification under respective categories of priority sector, provided the 
underlying assets are eligible to be categorized under the respective categories of priority 
sector and the banks fulfil the Reserve Bank of India guidelines on IBPCs and terms & 
conditions specified in Para 1.9 of the Operating Guidelines for Small Finance Banks issued 
by Department of Banking Regulation (RBI/2016-17/81 DBR.NBD.No.26/16.13.218/2016-17 
dated October 06, 2016) on Credit risk transfer and portfolio sales/purchases. 
With regard to the underlying assets of the IBPC transactions being eligible for 
categorization under ‘Export Credit’ as per Para 3, the IBPC bought by banks, on a risk 
sharing basis, may be classified from purchasing bank’s perspective for priority sector 
categorization. However, in such a scenario, the issuing bank shall certify that the underlying 
asset is ‘Export Credit’, in addition to the due diligence required to be undertaken by the 
issuing and the purchasing bank as per the guidelines in this regard. 
13. Priority Sector Lending Certificates 
The outstanding priority sector lending certificates bought by banks will be eligible for 
classification under respective categories of priority sector provided the assets are originated 
by banks, are eligible to be classified as priority sector advances and fulfil the Reserve Bank 
of India guidelines on Priority Sector Lending Certificates issued vide Circular 

 
14 
 
FIDD.CO.Plan.BC.23/04.09.001/2015-16 dated April 7, 2016 and terms & conditions 
specified in Para 1.9 of the Operating Guidelines for Small Finance Banks issued by 
Department of Banking Regulation (RBI/2016-17/81 DBR.NBD.No.26/16.13.218/2016-17 
dated October 06, 2016) on Credit risk transfer and portfolio sales/purchases. 
14. Monitoring and Non-achievement of Priority Sector targets: 
To ensure continuous flow of credit to priority sector, the compliance of banks will be 
monitored on quarterly basis. The data on priority sector advances has to be furnished by 
banks at quarterly and annual intervals as per reporting format. 
The mechanism of RIDF, in which Banks having any shortfall in lending to priority sector / 
sub-sectors, are allocated amounts for contribution to the RIDF established with NABARD 
and other funds with NABARD / NHB / SIDBI / MUDRA Ltd., shall be made applicable 
commencing from the year 2019-20 i.e. banks having shortfall in their PSL targets / sub-
targets as on March 31, 2019, will require to contribute to RIDF and other funds in the 
following year, as directed by Reserve Bank. 
The achievement will be arrived at the end of financial year based on the average of priority 
sector 
target 
/sub-target 
achievement 
as 
at 
the 
end 
of 
each 
quarter. 
(Illustrative example give in Annexure – I) 
The misclassifications identified during the course of supervisory inspection by RBI would be 
adjusted / reduced from the achievement of that year, to which the amount of 
declassification / misclassification pertains, for arriving at the actual achievements of targets 
and sub-targets. 
Further, non-achievement of priority sector targets and sub-targets will be taken into account 
while granting regulatory clearances / approvals for various purposes. 
 
 
 
 

 
15 
 
SECTION – VII. Common Guidelines For Priority Sector Loans 
 
SFBs should comply with the following common guidelines for all categories of advances 
under the priority sector. 
 
i. Rate of interest 
The rates on interest on bank loans will be as per directives issued by our Department of 
Banking Regulation from time to time. 
 
ii. Service charges 
No loan related and adhoc service charges/inspection charges should be levied on priority 
sector loans up to 25,000. In case of eligible priority sector loans to SHGs/JLGs, this limit 
will be applicable per member and not to the group as a whole. 
iii. Receipt, Sanction/Rejection/Disbursement Register 
A register/ electronic record should be maintained by the bank, wherein the date of receipt, 
sanction/rejection/disbursement with reasons thereof, etc., should be recorded. The 
register/electronic record should be made available to all inspecting agencies. 
 
iv. Issue of Acknowledgement of Loan Applications 
Banks should provide acknowledgement for loan applications received under priority sector 
loans. Bank Boards should prescribe a time limit within which the bank communicates its 
decision in writing to the applicants. 
v. Definitions/Clarifications: 
a) Contingent liabilities/off-balance sheet items do not form part of priority sector target 
achievement. 
 
b) The term “all-inclusive interest” includes interest (effective annual interest), processing 
fees and service charges. 
 
c) Banks should ensure that loans extended under priority sector are for approved 
purposes and the end use is continuously monitored. The banks should put in place 
proper internal controls and systems in this regard. 
vi. Amendments 
These guidelines are subject to any further instructions that may be issued by the RBI from 
time to time. 

 
16 
 
Annexure – I 
Priority Sector Target Achievement – Calculation of shortfall / excess 
Illustrative example: 
Tables No.1 and 2 below illustrate the method followed for computation of shortfall / excess 
in priority sector target achievement at the end of financial year. 
 Amount in ₹ thousands 
(Table – 1) 
Quarter 
ended 
PSL targets 
Priority Sector 
Amount Outstanding 
Shortfall / Excess 
June 
3296156032 
3169380800 
-126775232 
September 
3088265369 
3119459969 
31194600 
December 
3176948703 
3192913269 
15964566 
March 
3245609908 
3213475156 
-32134752 
Total 
12806980012 
12695229194 
-111750818 
Average 
3201745003 
3173807299 
-27937704 
 
Amount in ₹ thousands 
(Table – 2) 
Quarter 
ended 
PSL targets 
Priority Sector 
Amount Outstanding 
Shortfall / Excess 
June 
3296156032 
3279675252 
-16480780 
September 
3088265369 
3123780421 
35515052 
December 
3176948703 
3272257164 
95308461 
March 
3245609908 
3213153809 
-32456099 
Total 
12806980012 
12888866646 
81886634 
Average 
3201745003 
3222216661 
20471658 
In the example given in Table -1, the bank has overall shortfall of ₹27937704 thousands at 
the end of the finance year. In table – 2, the bank has overall excess of ₹20471658 
thousands at the end of the financial year. 
The method will be followed for calculating the achievement of quarterly and yearly priority 
sector sub-targets. 

 
17 
 
Note: The computation of priority sector targets / sub-targets achievement will be based on 
the ANBC as at the corresponding date of the preceding year. 
 
 

 
18 
 
CHAPTER III: LENDING TO MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM 
ENTERPRISES 
Definitions/ Clarifications 
 
In these guidelines, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms herein shall bear the 
meanings assigned to them as below: 
 
a) The MSMED Act, 2006 means ‘Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
(MSMED) Act, 2006’ as notified by the Government of India on June 16, 2006 and the 
amendments, if any, carried out therein by the Government of India from time to time. 
b) ‘Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises’ mean the enterprises as defined in the MSMED 
Act, 2006 and the amendments, if any, carried out therein by the Government of India 
from time to time. 
c) ‘Manufacturing’ and ‘Service’ Enterprises mean the enterprises as defined in the 
MSMED Act, 2006 or as notified by the Government of India, Ministry of MSME under 
the MSMED Act, 2006 from time to time. 
d) ‘Priority Sector’ means the sectors as defined in Chapter – II on Priority Sector Lending 
– Targets and Classification. 
e) ‘Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC)’ would mean Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) as 
defined in Chapter – II on Priority Sector Lending – Targets and Classification. 
 
 

 
19 
 
SECTION – I. MSMED Act, 2006 
 
1.1 Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006 
 
The Government of India has enacted the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development (MSMED) Act, 2006 and notified the same vide Gazette Notification dated 
June 16, 2006. With the enactment of MSMED Act 2006, the paradigm shift that has taken 
place is the inclusion of the services sector in the definition of Micro, Small & Medium 
enterprises, apart from extending the scope to medium enterprises. The MSMED Act, 2006 
has modified the definition of micro, small and medium enterprises engaged in 
manufacturing or production and providing or rendering of services. The Reserve Bank has 
notified the changes to all scheduled commercial banks. Further, the definition, as per the 
Act, has been adopted for purposes of bank credit vide RBI circular ref. RPCD.PLNFS. 
BC.No.63/06.02.31/2006-07 dated April 4, 2007. 
 
1.2 Definition of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
 
a) Manufacturing Enterprises i.e. Subject to the definition in MSMED Act, 2006, 
manufacturing enterprises would mean enterprises engaged in the manufacture or 
production of goods as specified below: 
 
(i) A micro enterprise is an enterprise where investment in plant and machinery does not 
exceed Rs.25 lakh; 
 
(ii) A small enterprise is an enterprise where the investment in plant and machinery is 
more than Rs.25 lakh but does not exceed Rs.5 crore; and 
 
(iii) A medium enterprise is an enterprise where the investment in plant and machinery is 
more than Rs.5 crore but does not exceed Rs.10 crore. 
 
In case of the above enterprises, investment in plant and machinery is the original cost and 
the items specified by the Ministry of Small Scale Industries vide its notification No.S.O. 
1722(E) dated October 5, 2006 (Annexure I). 
 
b) Service Enterprises i.e. Enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services and 
whose investment in equipment (original cost excluding furniture, fittings and other items 

 
20 
 
not directly related to the service rendered or as may be notified under the MSMED Act, 
2006) as specified below: 
 
(i) A micro enterprise is an enterprise where the investment in equipment does not 
exceed Rs.10 lakh; 
 
(ii) A small enterprise is an enterprise where the investment in equipment is more than 
Rs.10 lakh but does not exceed Rs.2 crore; and 
 
(iii) A medium enterprise is an enterprise where the investment in equipment is more than 
Rs. 2 crore but does not exceed Rs.5 crore. 
 
1.3 Priority Sector Guidelines for MSME sector 
 
In terms of Chapter – II on Priority Sector Lending – Targets and Classification, loans to 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, for both Manufacturing and Service sectors are 
eligible to be classified under the Priority Sector as per the norms prescribed in Para 2 on 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) of Chapter – II. 
 
 
Since the MSMED Act, 2006 does not provide for clubbing of investments of different 
enterprises set up by same person / company for the purpose of classification as Micro, 
Small and Medium enterprises, the Gazette Notification No. S.O.2 (E) dated January 1, 1993 
on clubbing of investments of two or more enterprises under the same ownership for the 
purpose of classification of industrial undertakings as SSI has been rescinded vide GOI 
Notification No. S.O. 563 (E) dated February 27, 2009. 
SECTION – II. Targets / Sub-Targets For MSME For SFBs 
 
2. 
Targets / sub-targets for lending to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSME) sector by Small Finance Banks 
 
2.1 
Advances to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector shall be 
reckoned in computing achievement under the overall Priority Sector target of 75 
percent of Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC). 
 
2.2 
Small Finance Banks are required to achieve a sub-target of 7.5 percent of ANBC 
for lending to Micro Enterprises. 
 

 
21 
 
2.3 
Bank loans above ₹ 5 crore per borrower / unit to Micro and Small Enterprises and 
₹10 crore to Medium Enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services 
and defined in terms of investment in equipment under MSMED Act, 2006, shall not 
be reckoned in computing achievement under the overall Priority Sector targets as 
above. 
 
SECTION – III. Common Guidelines For Lending To MSME Sector 
 
3. Common guidelines / instructions for lending to MSME sector 
 
3.1 Issue of Acknowledgement of Loan Applications to MSME borrowers 
 
SFBs are advised to mandatorily acknowledge all loan applications, submitted manually 
or online, by their MSME borrowers and ensure that a running serial number is recorded 
on the application form as well as on the acknowledgement receipt. SFBs are further 
advised to put in place a system of Central Registration of loan applications, online 
submission of loan applications and a system of e-tracking of MSE loan applications. 
 
3.2 Collateral 
The guidelines regarding extending collateral free loans to MSE are under examination 
and a separate communication in this regard shall be made in due course. 
 
3.3 Composite Loan 
A composite loan limit of Rs.1 crore can be sanctioned by SFBs to enable the MSE 
entrepreneurs to avail of their working capital and term loan requirement through Single 
Window. 
 
3.4 General Credit Card (GCC) Scheme 
SFBs may be guided by the circular no. RPCD.MSME & NFS. BC. No. 
61/06.02.31/2013-14 dated December 02, 2013 on General Credit Card Scheme for 
greater credit linkage for all productive activities within the overall Priority Sector 
guidelines and to capture all credit extended by banks to individuals for non-farm 
entrepreneurial activity. 
 
 
 
 

 
22 
 
3.5 Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) 
Government of India, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises had launched 
Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) for Technology Upgradation of Micro and 
Small Enterprises subject to the following terms and conditions: 
 
(i) Ceiling on the loan under the scheme is Rs.1 crore. 
(ii) The rate of subsidy is 15% for all units of micro and small enterprises up to loan 
ceiling at Sr. No. (i) above 
(iii) Calculation of admissible subsidy will be done with reference to the purchase price of 
plant and machinery instead of term loan disbursed to the beneficiary unit. 
(iv) SIDBI and NABARD will continue to be implementing agencies of the scheme. 
 
3.6 Streamlining flow of credit to Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) for 
facilitating timely and adequate credit flow during their ‘Life Cycle’: 
 
In order to provide timely financial support to Micro and Small enterprises facing financial 
difficulties during their ‘Life Cycle’, guidelines were issued to banks vide our circular 
FIDD.MSME & NFS.BC.No.60/06.02.31/2015-16 dated August 27, 2015 on the 
captioned subject. SFBs are advised to tune their lending policies to the MSE sector by 
incorporating therein the provisions in terms of the above circular so as to facilitate timely 
and adequate availability of credit to viable MSE borrowers especially during the need of 
funds in unforeseen circumstances. 
 
3.7 Debt Restructuring Mechanism for MSMEs 
(i) SFBs are advised to follow the guidelines / instructions pertaining to SME Debt 
Restructuring, as contained in Master Circular DBR.No.BP.BC.2/21.04.048/2015-16 
dated July 1, 2015 on Prudential norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification 
and Provisioning pertaining to Advances’ and as updated from time to time. 
(ii) SFBs are also advised in terms of our circular RPCD.SME&NFS.BC.No. 
102/06.04.01/2008-09 dated May 4, 2009 to do the following: 
 
a) put 
in 
place 
loan 
policies 
governing 
extension 
of 
credit 
facilities, 
Restructuring/Rehabilitation policy for revival of potentially viable sick units / 
enterprises (now read with guidelines on Framework for Revival and 
Rehabilitation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises issued on March 17, 

 
23 
 
2016) and non- discretionary One Time Settlement scheme for recovery of non-
performing loans for the MSE sector, with the approval of the Board of Directors 
and 
b) give wide publicity to the One Time settlement scheme implemented by them, by 
placing it on the bank’s website and through other possible modes of 
dissemination. They may allow reasonable time to the borrowers to submit the 
application and also make payment of the dues in order to extend the benefits of 
the scheme to eligible borrowers. 
 
3.8 Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation of MSMEs 
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Government of India, vide their 
Gazette Notification dated May 29, 2015 had notified a ‘Framework for Revival and 
Rehabilitation of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises’ to provide a simpler and 
faster mechanism to address the stress in the accounts of MSMEs and to facilitate the 
promotion and development of MSMEs. RBI issued the operating instructions to banks 
vide circular FIDD.MSME & NFS.BC.No.21/06.02.31/2015-16 on March 17, 2016 on 
March 17, 2016 after carrying out certain changes in the captioned Framework in 
consultation with the Government of India, Ministry of MSME so as to make it compatible 
with the existing regulatory guidelines on ‘Income Recognition, Asset Classification and 
provisioning pertaining to Advances’. The revival and rehabilitation of MSME units having 
loan limits up to Rs.25 crore would be undertaken under this Framework. The revised 
Framework supersedes our earlier Guidelines on Rehabilitation of Sick Micro and Small 
Enterprises issued vide our circular RPCD. CO. MSME & NFS.BC.40/06.02.31/2012-
2013 dated November 1, 2012, except those relating to Reliefs and Concessions for 
Rehabilitation of Potentially Viable Units and One Time Settlement, mentioned in the 
said circular. SFBs may be guided by the contents of the above circular. 
3.9 Structured Mechanism for monitoring the credit growth to the MSE sector 
In view of the concerns emerging from the deceleration in credit growth to the MSE 
sector, an Indian Banking Association (IBA)-led Sub-Committee (Chairman: Shri K.R. 
Kamath) was set up to suggest a structured mechanism to be put in place by banks to 
monitor the entire gamut of credit related issues pertaining to the sector. Based on the 
recommendations of the Committee, detailed guidelines were issued to the scheduled 
commercial banks vide our circular RPCD. MSME&NFS.BC.No.74/06.02.31/2012-13 
dated May 9, 2013. SFBs may be guided by the contents of the above circular. 

 
24 
 
SECTION –IV. Institutional Arrangements 
 
4 
Institutional arrangements 
4.1 Empowered Committee on MSMEs 
As part of the announcement made by the Union Finance Minister, Empowered Committees 
on MSMEs are constituted at the Regional Offices of Reserve Bank of India under the 
Chairmanship of the Regional Directors with the representatives of SLBC Convenor, senior 
level officers from two banks having predominant share in MSME financing in the state, 
representative of SIDBI Regional Office, the Director of MSME or Industries of the State 
Government, one or two senior level representatives from the MSME Associations in the 
state, and a senior level officer from SFC/SIDC as members. The Committee would meet 
periodically and review the progress in MSME financing as also rehabilitation of sick Micro, 
Small and Medium units. It would also coordinate with other banks/financial institutions and 
the state government in removing bottlenecks, if any, to ensure smooth flow of credit to the 
sector. 
 
4.2 Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) 
The Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) has formulated a Code of Bank's 
Commitment to Micro and Small Enterprises. This is a voluntary Code, which sets minimum 
standards of banking practices for banks to follow when they are dealing with Micro and 
Small Enterprises (MSEs) as defined in the Micro Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development (MSMED) Act, 2006. It provides protection to MSE and explains how banks 
are expected to deal with MSE for their day to-day operations and in times of financial 
difficulty. 
 
The Code does not replace or supersede regulatory or supervisory instructions issued by the 
Reserve Bank of India and SFBs will comply with such instructions /directions issued by the 
RBI from time to time. The complete text of the Code is available at the BCSBI's website 
(www.bcsbi.org.in). 
 
4.3 
Micro and Small Enterprises Sector – The imperative of Financial Literacy and 
consultancy support 
Keeping in view the high extent of financial exclusion in the MSME sector, it is imperative for 
SFBs that the excluded units are brought within the fold of the formal banking sector. The 
lack of financial literacy, operational skills, including accounting and finance, business 

 
25 
 
planning etc. represent formidable challenges for MSE borrowers underscoring the need for 
facilitation by banks in these critical financial areas. SFBs may refer to Chapter IV in this 
regard. 
 
4.4 
Cluster Approach 
SFBs may extend banking services in clusters / agglomerations which are as under: 
 
(i) 388 clusters are identified by United Nations Industrial Development Organisation 
(UNIDO) spread over 21 states in various parts of the country. A list of SME clusters as 
identified by UNIDO is available in Annex II of the Master Direction - Lending to Micro, 
Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) Sector dated July 21, 2016. 
 
(ii) The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has approved a list of clusters 
under the Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI) and 
Micro and Small Enterprises Cluster Development Programme (MSE-CDP) located in 
121 Minority Concentration Districts. 
 
4.5 Delayed Payment 
In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED), Act 2006, the 
provisions of the Interest on Delayed Payment Act, 1998 to Small Scale and Ancillary 
Industrial Undertakings, have been strengthened as under: 
 
(i) The buyer has to make payment to the supplier on or before the date agreed upon 
between him and the supplier in writing or, in case of no agreement, before the 
appointed day. The period agreed upon between the supplier and the buyer shall not 
exceed forty five days from the date of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance. 
 
(ii) In case the buyer fails to make payment of the amount to the supplier, he shall be liable 
to pay compound interest with monthly rests to the supplier on the amount from the 
appointed day or, on the date agreed on, at three times of the Bank Rate notified by 
Reserve Bank. 
 
(iii) For any goods supplied or services rendered by the supplier, the buyer shall be liable to 
pay the interest as advised at (ii) above. 
 
(iv) In case of dispute with regard to any amount due, a reference shall be made to the 
Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council, constituted by the respective State 
Government. 

 
26 
 
Further, SFBs are advised to fix sub-limits within the overall working capital limits to the large 
borrowers specifically for meeting the payment obligation in respect of purchases from 
MSMEs. 
 
SECTION –V. Committees On Flow Of Credit To MSME Sector 
 
5. 
SFBs may be guided by the contents of the following circulars while extending credit 
to MSE sector. 
 
5.1 Report of the High Level Committee on Credit to SSI (now MSE) (Kapur 
Committee) 
All scheduled commercial banks were advised vide our circular RPCD.No. PLNFS.BC.22 
/06.02.31/98-99 
dated 
August 
28, 
1998 
to 
implement 
the 
Kapur 
Committee 
Recommendations. 
 
5.2 Report of the Committee to Examine the Adequacy of Institutional Credit to SSI 
Sector (now MSE) and Related Aspects (Nayak Committee) 
All scheduled commercial banks were advised vide our circular RPCD. PLNFS/ BC. No. 
61/06.0262/2000-01 dated March 2, 2001 to implement the Nayak Committee 
Recommendations. 
 
5.3 Report of the Working Group on Flow of Credit to SSI (now MSE) Sector (Ganguly 
Committee) 
The recommendations of the Committee was communicated to banks for implementation 
vide circular RPCD.PLNFS.BC.28/06.02.31 (WG)/ 2004-05 dated September 4, 2004. 
 
5.4 
Working Group on Rehabilitation of Sick SMEs (Chairman: Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty) 
Banks were advised vide circular dated RPCD. SME & NFS.BC.No. 102/06.04.01/ 2008-09 
dated May 4, 2009 to consider implementation of the recommendations, inter alia, that 
lending in case of all advances upto Rs 2 crores may be done on the basis of scoring model. 
Banks have further been advised vide circular DBOD. Dir. BC.No. 106/13.03.00/2013-14 
dated April 15, 2014 to undertake a review of their loan policy governing extension of credit 
facilities to the MSE sector, with a view to using Board approved credit scoring models in 
their evaluation of the loan proposals of MSE borrowers. 
 

 
27 
 
Annexure I 
MINISTRY OF SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 5th October, 2006 
 
S.O. 1722(E) – In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 7 of the 
MSMED Act, 2006 (27 of 2006) herein referred to as the said Act, the Central Government 
hereby specifies the following items, the cost of which shall be excluded while calculating 
the investment in plant and machinery in the case of the enterprises mentioned in Section 
7(1)(a) of the said Act, namely: 
(i) 
equipment such as tools, jigs, dyes, moulds and spare parts for maintenance and the 
cost of consumables stores; 
(ii) 
installation of plant and machinery; 
(iii) 
research and development equipment and pollution controlled equipment 
(iv) 
power generation set and extra transformer installed by the enterprise as per 
regulations of the State Electricity Board; 
(v) 
bank charges and service charges paid to the National Small Industries Corporation 
or the State Small Industries Corporation; 
(vi) 
procurement or installation of cables, wiring, bus bars, electrical control panels (not 
mounted on individual machines), oil circuit breakers or miniature circuit breakers 
which are necessarily to be used for providing electrical power to the plant and 
machinery or for safety measures; 
(vii) 
gas producer plants; 
(viii) transportation charges ( excluding sales-tax or value added tax and excise duty) for 
indigenous machinery from the place of their manufacture to the site of the 
enterprise; 
(ix) 
charges paid for technical know-how for erection of plant and machinery; 
(x) 
such storage tanks which store raw material and finished products and are not linked 
with the manufacturing process; and 
(xi) 
firefighting equipment. 
 
2. 
While calculating the investment in plant and machinery referred to in paragraph 1, 
the original price thereof, irrespective of whether the plant and machinery are new 
or second hand, shall be taken into account provided that in the case of imported 
machinery, the following shall be included in calculating the value, namely; 
 
(i) 
Import duty (excluding miscellaneous expenses such as transportation from the port 
to the site of the factory, demurrage paid at the port); 
(ii) 
Shipping charges; 
(iii) 
Customs clearance charges; and 
(iv) 
Sales tax or value added tax. 
 
----S/d----- 
 
(F.No.4(1)/2006-MSME- Policy) 
JAWHAR SIRCAR, Addl. Secy. 

 
28 
 
CHAPTER IV: FINANCIAL LITERACY 
SECTION – I Conduct of Financial Literacy Camps by Rural banking outlets 
manned by bank’s own staff 
Conduct of Financial Literacy Camps 
Rural banking outlets manned by bank’s own staff of SFBs are required to conduct one 
camp per month (on the Third Friday of each month after branch hours). This camp will 
cover all the messages that are part of the Financial Awareness Messages (FAME) 
booklet and the two digital platforms UPI and *99# (USSD). The proposed approach by rural 
banking outlets manned by bank’s own staff is illustrated in Annex I. In case there are two or 
more such outlets in a village, the LDM may ensure that such outlets conduct the camps on 
rotation basis every month. 
Funding support from FIF 
Rural banking outlets manned by bank’s own staff of SFBs are eligible for funding support 
for the financial literacy camps to the extent of 60% of the expenditure of the camp subject to 
a maximum of ₹ 5,000/- per camp. For details on funding, please refer circular No. 
107/DFIBT-24/ 2017 dated May 4, 2017 issued by NABARD. 
SECTION – II. Reporting Mechanism 
Reporting mechanism: 
The reporting format as in Annexure I has to be submitted to SLBCs / UTLBCs within 30 
days from the end of the quarter. 
The above guidelines will come into force from July 1, 2017 and the reporting format will be 
effective from the quarter ending September 30, 2017. 
The impact of the financial literacy camps will be assessed / evaluated on an ongoing basis 
by the Lead District Officers (LDOs) of Reserve Bank of India. 
 
 

 
29 
 
Annexure I 
 
QUARTERLY REPORT ON CONDUCT OF CAMPS BY RURAL BRANCHES OF BANKS 
 
State 
 
 
 
Quarter ended 
 
 
 
Year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
District 
No of rural 
banking outlets 
manned by 
bank’s own staff 
in district 
No of camps 
conducted 
during the 
quarter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
30 
 
CHAPTER V: FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
SECTION – I. Financial Inclusion Plans 
 
Financial Inclusion Plans 
As the Small Finance Banks have been set up to further financial inclusion and their client 
base would primarily be migrant labour workforce, low income households, small 
businesses, other unorganised sector entities etc. their internal target should be in line with 
their objectives. The bank’s Board shall review the progress in this regards on regular basis 
and submit progress report on monthly basis in respect of the various parameters prescribed 
by RBI in the Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) monitoring format. In this connection, the 
guidelines on FIP for Small Finance Banks are as under: 
a. Small Finance Banks shall adopt the template of Financial Inclusion Plan provided by 
RBI to submit granular data upto district level across the four population groups, 
namely- Metropolitan, Urban, Semi Urban and Rural. The date of submission of the 
monthly progress shall be 15th of the succeeding month for data pertaining to the 
previous month. 
b. Progress in respect of various parameters of FIP shall be monitored on a monthly basis 
and a review shall be conducted on an annual basis. 
 
 SECTION – II. Business Correspondents 
 
Business Correspondents- Cash Management and Umbrella Insurance 
SFBs may formulate a policy for engaging Business Correspondents (BCs), with the 
approval of their Board of Directors and be guided by instructions issued by Department of 
Banking Regulation (DBR) on Business Correspondents under Master Circular on Branch 
Authorisation (available on DBOD. No. BAPD.BC. 7/22.01.001/2014-15 dated July 01, 2014) 
updated from time to time. The activities to be undertaken by the BCs would be within the 
normal course of banking business. With a view to providing impetus to functioning of BCs in 
furthering financial inclusion, the following guidelines pertaining to cash management are 
issued: 
a. The Boards of the banks must review the operations of BCs at least once every six 
months with a view to ensuring that the requirement of prefunding of Corporate BCs and 

 
31 
 
BC Agents should progressively taper down with the passage of time. Ideally in all 
normal cases, the prefunding should progressively come down in such a manner so as 
to reach around 15% of the limits fixed for each BC/CSP in case of deposits and 30% in 
case of Bank Guarantees, in two years from the time a BC starts operations. 
b. The Board should also review the position of payment to remuneration of BCs and 
should also lay down a system of monitoring by the top management of the bank. The 
issue of allowing BCs to handle deposit and payment transactions of various credits, 
remittance, overdraft and other products of banks must also be examined by the Board 
from time to time. Complaints redress system in this regard should also be laid down by 
the Board. 
c. The banks should put in place a Board approved mechanism for providing Umbrella 
Insurance for cash handled by BCs. 
SECTION – III. SHG-Bank Linkage Programme 
 
SHG-Bank Linkage Programme for Small Finance Banks 
To scale up the SHGs linkage programme and make it sustainable, SFBs are advised to 
consider lending to SHGs as part of their mainstream credit operations both at policy and 
implementation level. They may include SHG linkage in their corporate strategy/plan, training 
curriculum of their officers and staff and implement it as a regular business activity and 
monitor and review it periodically. 
In line with the above, the following guidelines may be considered by SFBs while formulating 
policies pertaining to Self Help Groups. 
a. SHG lending to be a part of planning process: Lending to SHGs should be included in 
branch credit plan, block credit plan, district credit plan and state credit plan of each 
SFB. While no target is being prescribed under SHG bank linkage programme, utmost 
priority should be accorded to the sector in preparation of these plans. It should also 
form an integral part of the bank’s corporate credit plan. 
b. Opening of Savings Bank A/c: The SHGs registered or unregistered which are 
engaged in promoting savings habit among their members would be eligible to open 
savings bank accounts with SFBs. These SHGs need not necessarily have already 
availed of credit facilities from banks before opening savings bank accounts. KYC 

 
32 
 
verification of all the members of SHG shall not be required while opening the savings 
bank account of the SHG as KYC verification of all the office bearers shall suffice. No 
separate KYC verification of the members or office bearers shall be necessary at the 
time of credit linking of SHGs. 
c. Margin and Security Norms: As per operational guidelines issued by NABARD, SHGs 
may be sanctioned savings linked loans by banks (varying from a saving to loan ratio of 
1:1 to 1:4). However, in case of matured SHGs, loans may be given beyond the limit of 
four times the savings as per the discretion of the bank. 
d. Documentation: A simple system requiring minimum procedures and documentation is 
a precondition for augmenting flow of credit to SHGs. Banks should strive to remove all 
operational irritants and make arrangements to expeditiously sanction and disburse 
credit by delegating adequate sanctioning powers to branch managers. The loan 
application forms, procedures and documents should be made simple. It would help in 
providing prompt and hassle-free credit. 
e. Presence of defaulters in SHGs: Defaults by a few members of SHGs and/or their 
family members to the financing bank should not ordinarily come in the way of financing 
SHGs per se by banks provided the SHG is not in default to it. However, the bank loan 
may not be utilized by the SHG for financing a defaulter member to the bank. 
f. Capacity Building and Training: SFBs may initiate suitable steps to internalize the 
SHGs linkage project and organize exclusive short duration programmes for the field 
level functionaries. In addition, suitable awareness/sensitization programmes may be 
conducted for their middle level controlling officers as well as senior officers. 
g. Monitoring and Review of SHG Lending: The progress of the SHG programme may 
be reviewed by the SFBs at regular intervals. A progress report, as prescribed vide 
circular FIDD.FID.BC.No.56/12.01.033/2014-15 dated May 21, 2015, may be sent to 
NABARD (Micro Credit Innovations Department), Mumbai, on a half-yearly basis, as on 
30 September and 31 March each year so as to reach within 30 days of the half-year to 
which the report relates. 
h. Interest rates: SFBs would have the discretion to decide on the interest rates applicable 
to loans given by banks to Self Help Groups/member beneficiaries. 
i. 
Service/ Processing charges: No loan related and ad hoc service charges/inspection 
charges should be levied on priority sector loans up to ₹ 25,000. In the case of eligible 

 
33 
 
priority sector loans to SHGs/ JLGs, this limit will be applicable per member and not to 
the group as a whole. 
j. 
Total Financial Inclusion and Credit Requirement of SHGs: SFBs have been advised 
to meet the entire credit requirements of SHG members namely, (a) income generation 
activities, (b) social needs like housing, education, marriage, etc. and (c) debt swapping. 
k. Encourage SHG Linkage: SFBs should provide adequate incentives to their branches 
in financing the Self Help Groups (SHGs) and establish linkages with them, making the 
procedures absolutely simple and easy while providing for total flexibility in such 
procedures to suit local conditions. The group dynamics of working of the SHGs need 
neither be regulated nor formal structures imposed or insisted upon. The approach to 
financing of SHGs should be totally hassle-free and may include consumption 
expenditures. 
 

 
34 
 
CHAPTER VI: FARM SECTOR 
SECTION – I. Revised Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Scheme 
1. Introduction 
The Kisan Credit Card (KCC) scheme was introduced in 1998 for issue of Kisan Credit 
Cards to farmers on the basis of their holdings for uniform adoption by the banks so that 
farmers may use them to readily purchase agriculture inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, 
pesticides etc. and draw cash for their production needs. The scheme was further extended 
for the investment credit requirement of farmers viz. allied and non-farm activities in the year 
2004. The scheme was further revisited in 2012 by a working Group under the Chairmanship 
of Shri T. M. Bhasin, CMD, Indian Bank with a view to simplify the scheme and facilitate 
issue of Electronic Kisan Credit Cards. The scheme provides broad guidelines to banks for 
operationalizing the KCC scheme. Implementing banks will have the discretion to adopt the 
same to suit institution/location specific requirements. 
2. Applicability of the Scheme 
The Kisan Credit Card Scheme detailed in the ensuing paragraphs is to be implemented by 
Commercial Banks, RRBs, Small Finance Banks and Cooperatives. 
3. Objective / Purpose 
The Kisan Credit Card scheme aims at providing adequate and timely credit support from 
the banking system under a single window with flexible and simplified procedure to the 
farmers for their cultivation and other needs as indicated below: 
a. 
To meet the short term credit requirements for cultivation of crops; 
b. 
Post-harvest expenses; 
c. 
Produce marketing loan; 
d. 
Consumption requirements of farmer household; 
e. 
Working capital for maintenance of farm assets and activities allied to agriculture; 
f. 
Investment credit requirement for agriculture and allied activities. 
Note: The aggregate of components ‘a’ to ‘e’ above will form the short term credit limit 
portion and the aggregate of components under ‘f’ will form the long term credit limit portion. 

 
35 
 
4. Eligibility 
i. Farmers - individual/joint borrowers who are owner cultivators; 
ii. Tenant farmers, oral lessees & share croppers; 
iii. Self Help Groups (SHGs) or Joint Liability Groups (JLGs) of farmers including tenant 
farmers, share croppers etc. 
5. Fixation of credit limit / Loan amount 
The credit limit under the Kisan Credit Card may be fixed as under: 
5.1 All farmers other than marginal farmers1 : 
5.1.1 The short term limit to be arrived for the first year (For cultivating single crop in 
a year): 
Scale of finance for the crop (as decided by District Level Technical Committee) x Extent of 
area cultivated + 10% of limit towards post-harvest/household/ consumption requirements + 
20% of limit towards repairs and maintenance expenses of farm assets + crop insurance 
and/or accident insurance including PAIS, health insurance & asset insurance. 
5.1.2 Limit for second & subsequent year 
First year limit for crop cultivation purpose arrived at as above plus 10% of the limit towards 
cost escalation / increase in scale of finance for every successive year (2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th 
year) and estimated term loan component for the tenure of Kisan Credit Card, i.e., five 
years. (Illustration I) 
5.1.3 For cultivating more than one crop in a year 
The limit is to be fixed as above depending upon the crops cultivated as per proposed 
cropping pattern for the first year plus an additional 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / 
increase in scale of finance for every successive year (2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th year). It is 
assumed that the farmer adopts the same cropping pattern for the succeeding four years. In 
case the cropping pattern adopted by the farmer is changed in the subsequent year, the limit 
may be reworked. (Illustration I) 
 
1 Farmers with landholding of up to 1 hectare (Marginal Farmers). Farmers with a landholding of more than 1 hectare and up to 
2 hectares (Small Farmers). 

 
36 
 
5.1.4 Term loan for investment 
The term loan for investment is to be made towards land development, minor irrigation, 
purchase of farm equipment and allied agricultural activities. The banks may fix the quantum 
of credit for term and working capital limit for agricultural and allied activities, etc., based on 
the unit cost of the asset/s proposed to be acquired by the farmer, the allied activities 
already being undertaken on the farm, the bank's judgment on repayment capacity vis-a-vis 
total loan burden devolving on the farmer, including existing loan obligations. 
The long term loan limit should be based on the proposed investment(s) during the five year 
period and the bank's perception on the repaying capacity of the farmer. 
5.1.5 Maximum Permissible Limit 
The short term loan limit arrived for the 5th year plus the estimated long term loan 
requirement will be the Maximum Permissible Limit (MPL) and is to be treated as the Kisan 
Credit Card limit. 
5.1.6 Fixation of Sub-limits 
i. Short term loans and term loans are governed by different interest rates. At present, short 
term crop loans upto ₹ 3 lakh are covered under Interest Subvention Scheme/Prompt 
Repayment Incentive scheme of the Government of India2. Further, repayment schedule and 
norms are different for short term and term loans. Hence, in order to have operational and 
accounting convenience, the card limit is to be bifurcated into separate sub-limits for short 
term cash credit limit cum savings account and term loans. 
ii. Drawing limit for short term cash credit should be fixed based on the cropping pattern. The 
amount(s) for crop production, repair and maintenance of farm assets and consumption may 
be allowed to be drawn as per the convenience of the farmer. In case the revision of scale of 
finance for any year by the district level technical committee exceeds the notional hike of 
10% contemplated while fixing the five year limit, a revised drawable limit may be fixed in 
consultation with the farmer. In case such revisions require the card limit itself to be 
enhanced (4th or 5th year), the same may be done and the farmer be so advised. 
 
2 Currently not applicable to Small Finance Banks. 

 
37 
 
iii. For term loans, instalments may be allowed to be withdrawn based on the nature of 
investment and repayment schedule drawn as per the economic life of the proposed 
investments. It is to be ensured that at any point of time the total liability should be within 
the drawing limit of the concerned year. 
iv. Wherever the card limit / liability so arrived warrants additional security, the banks may 
take suitable collateral as per their policy. 
5.2 For Marginal Farmers 
A flexible limit of ₹ 10, 000 to ₹ 50, 000 may be provided (as Flexi KCC) based on the land 
holding and crops grown including post-harvest warehouse storage related credit needs and 
other farm expenses, consumption needs, etc., plus small term loan investment(s) like 
purchase of farm equipment(s), establishing mini dairy/backyard poultry as per assessment 
of the Branch Manager without relating it to the value of land. The composite KCC limit is to 
be fixed for a period of five years on this basis. 
Wherever higher limit is required due to change in cropping pattern and / or scale of finance, 
the limit may be arrived at as per the estimation indicated at para 4.1 (Illustration II) 
6. Disbursement 
6.1 The short term component of the KCC limit is in the nature of revolving cash credit 
facility. There should be no restriction in number of debits and credits. The drawing limit for 
the current season/year could be allowed to be drawn using any of the following delivery 
channels. 
i. 
operation through branch; 
ii. 
operation using cheque facility; 
iii. 
withdrawal through ATM /debit cards 
iv. 
operation through Business Correspondents and ‘banking outlet/part-time banking 
outlet’3 
v. 
operation through PoS available in Sugar Mills/Contract farming companies, etc., 
especially for tie-up advances; 
vi. 
operations through PoS available with input dealers; 
vii. 
Mobile based transfer transactions at agricultural input dealers and mandies. 
 
3 DBR’s Circular on Rationalisation of Branch Authorisation Policy- Revision of Guidelines 

 
38 
 
Note: (v), (vi) & (vii) to be introduced as early as possible so as to reduce transaction costs 
of both the bank as well as the farmer. 
6.2 The long term loan for investment purposes may be drawn as per installment fixed. 
7. Issue of Electronic Kisan Credit Cards 
All new KCC must be issued as smart card cum debit card as laid down in Part II of the 
Annex. Further, at the time of renewal of existing KCC; farmers must be issued smart card 
cum debit card. 
The short term credit limit and the term loan limit are two distinct components of the 
aggregate KCC limit bearing different rates of interest and repayment periods. Until a 
composite card could be issued with appropriate software to separately account transactions 
in the sub limits, two separate electronic cards may be issued for all new/renewed cards. 
8. Validity/Renewal 
i. 
Banks may determine the validity period of KCC and its periodic review. 
ii. 
The review may result in continuation of the facility, enhancement of limit or cancellation 
of the limit/withdrawal of the facility depending upon increase in cropping area/pattern 
and performance of the borrower. 
iii. 
When the bank has granted extension and/or re-schedule the period of repayment on 
account of natural calamities affecting the farmer, the period for reckoning the status of 
operations as satisfactory or otherwise would get extended together with the extended 
amount of limit. When the proposed extension is beyond one crop season, the 
aggregate of debits for which extension is granted is to be transferred to a separate term 
loan account with stipulation for repayment in installments. 
9. Rate of Interest (ROI): 
The rate of interest will be as stipulated in DBR Master Directions on Interest Rate on 
Advances. 
10. Repayment Period: 
10.1 The repayment period may be fixed by banks as per the anticipated harvesting and 
marketing period for the crops for which the loan has been granted. 

 
39 
 
10.2 The term loan component will be normally repayable within a period of 5 years 
depending on the type of activity/investment as per the existing guidelines applicable for 
investment credit. 
10.3 Financing banks may, at their discretion, provide longer repayment period for term loan 
depending on the type of investment. 
11. Margin 
To be decided by banks. 
12. Security 
12.1 Security will be applicable as per RBI guidelines prescribed from time to time. 
12.2 Security requirement may be as under: 
i. Hypothecation of crops: For KCC limit upto ₹ 1.00 lakh banks are to waive 
margin/security requirements. 
ii. With tie-up for recovery: Banks may consider sanctioning loans on hypothecation of 
crops up to card limit of ₹ 3.00 lakh without insisting on collateral security. 
iii. Collateral security: Collateral security may be obtained at the discretion of Bank for loan 
limits above ₹ 1.00 lakh in case of non-tie-up and above ₹ 3.00 lakh in case of tie-up 
advances. 
iv. In states where banks have the facility of on-line creation of charge on the land records, 
the same shall be ensured. 
13. Other features 
Uniformity to be adopted in respect of following: 
13.1 The applicable interest subvention /incentive for prompt repayment 4 as advised by 
Government of India and/or State Governments. The bankers will give adequate publicity of 
the facility so that maximum farmers may benefit from the scheme. 
13.2 Besides the mandatory crop insurance, the KCC holder should have the option to avail 
the benefit of any type of asset insurance, accident insurance (including PAIS), health 
 
4 Currently not applicable to Small Finance Banks. 

 
40 
 
insurance (wherever product is available) and have premium paid through his/her KCC 
account. Premium has to be borne by the farmer/bank according to the terms of the scheme. 
Farmer beneficiaries should be made aware of the insurance cover available and their 
consent (except in case of crop insurance, it being mandatory) is to be obtained, at the 
application stage itself. 
13.3 A one-time documentation5 at the first time of availment of KCC loan and thereafter 
simple declaration (about crops grown/proposed) by farmer from the second year onwards. 
14. Classification of account as NPA: 
14.1 The extant prudential norms on income recognition, asset-classification and 
provisioning6 will apply for loans granted under the KCC Scheme. 
14.2 Charging of interest is to be done uniformly as is applicable to agricultural advances. 
15. Processing fee, inspection charges and other charges may be decided by banks. 
16. Other conditions while implementing the revised guidelines of KCC Scheme: 
16.1 In case the farmer applies for loan against the warehouse receipt of his produce, the 
banks would consider such requests as per the established procedure and guidelines. 
However, when such loans are sanctioned, these should be linked with the crop loan 
account, if any, and the crop loan outstanding in the account could be settled at the stage of 
disbursal of the pledge loan, if the farmer so desires. 
16.2 The National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) will design the KCC card to be 
adopted by all the banks with their branding. 
 
5Documentation as per banks internal guidelines 
6 DBR’s Master Directions on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning Norms 
 
 

 
41 
 
 
Illustration IA. 
Small farmer cultivating multiple crops in a year 
1. 
Assumptions 
A. 
Land holding : 2 acres 
B. 
Cropping Pattern 
Paddy - 1 acre (Scale of finance plus crop insurance per acre : ₹.11000) 
Sugarcane - 1 acre (Scale of finance plus crop insurance per acre : ₹.22,000) 
C. 
Investment / Allied Activities 
i 
Establishment of 1+1 Dairy Unit in 1st Year () (Unit Cost : ₹ 20,000 per animal) 
ii 
Replacement of Pump set in 3rd year (Unit Cost : ₹.30,000) 
2. 
(i) 
Crop loan Component 
Cost of cultivation of 1 acre of Paddy and 1acre of 
Sugarcane (11,000+22,000) 
: 
₹.33,000 
Add : 10% towards post-harvest / household expense / 
consumption 
: 
₹. 3,300 
Add : 20% towards farm maintenance 
: 
₹. 6,600 
Total Crop Loan limit for 1st year 
: 
₹. 42,900 
Loan Limit for 2nd year 
 
 
Add : 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / increase 
in scale of finance (10% of 42900 i.e 4300) 
: 
₹. 4,300 
₹. 47,200 
 
Loan Limit for 3rd year 
: 
 
Add : 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / increase 
in scale of finance (10% of 47,200 i.e., 4,700) 
 
₹. 4,700 
₹. 51,900 
 
: 
 
Loan Limit for 4th year 
: 
 
Add : 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / increase 
in scale of finance (10% of 51,900 i.e 5,200) 
 
₹. 5,200 
₹. 57,100 
 
: 
 
Loan Limit for 5th year 
: 
 
Add : 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / increase 
in scale of finance (10% of 57100 i.e 5700) 
 
₹. 5,700 
₹. 62,800 
Say ….(A) : 
₹. 63,000 
 
 : 
 
 
 
 

 
42 
 
(ii) 
Term loan component : 
1st Year : Cost of 1+1 Dairy Unit 
: 
₹. 40,000 
3rd Year : Replacement of Pumpset : 
: 
₹. 30,000 
Total term loan amount ….(B) : 
₹. 70,000 
Maximum Permissible Limit / 
 Kisan Credit Card Limit (A) +(B) 
: 
₹. 1,33,000 
 
: 
Rs. 1.33 lakh 
Note: Drawing Limit will be reduced every year based on repayment schedule of the 
term loan(s) availed and withdrawals will be allowed up to the drawing limit. 
B 
Other farmer cultivating multiple crops in a year 
1. 
Assumptions : 
2. 
Land Holding : 10 acres 
3. 
Cropping Pattern : 
Paddy - 5 acres (Scale of finance plus crop insurance per acre ₹.11,000) Followed by 
Groundnut - 5 acres (Scale of finance plus crop insurance per acre ₹.10,000) 
Sugarcane - 5 acres (Scale of finance plus crop insurance per acre ₹.22,000) 
4. 
Investment / Allied Activities : 
i. 
Establishment 1+1 Dairy Unit in 1st Year (Unit cost : ₹.50,000) 
ii. 
Purchase of Tractor in 1st Year (Unit Cost : ₹.6,00,000) 
2. 
Assessment of Card Limit 
(i) 
Crop loan Component 
Cost of cultivation of 5 acres of Paddy, 5 Acres of 
Groundnut and 5 acres of Sugarcane 
: 
₹ 2,15,000 
Add : 10% towards post-harvest / household expense / 
consumption 
: 
₹ 21,500 
Add : 20% towards farm maintenance 
: 
₹ 43,000 
Total Crop Loan limit for 1st year 
: 
₹ 2,79,500 
Loan Limit for 2nd year 
 
 
Add : 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / increase 
in scale of finance (10% of 2,79,500 i.e., 27,950) 
: 
₹ 27,950 
 
: 
₹ 3,07,450 
Loan Limit for 3rd year 
 
 
Add : 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / increase 
in scale of finance (10% of 3,07,450 i.e., 30,750) 
: 
₹ 30,750 

 
43 
 
 
: 
₹ 3,38,200 
Loan Limit for 4th year 
 
 
Add : 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / increase 
in scale of finance (10% of 338200 i.e., 33,800) 
: 
₹ 33,800 
 
: 
₹ 3,72,000 
Loan Limit for 5th year 
 
 
Add : 10% of the limit towards cost escalation / increase 
in scale of finance (10% of 3,72,000 i.e., 37,200) 
: 
₹ 37,200 
: 
₹ 4,09,200 
 Say…. 
(A) 
: 
₹ 4,09,000 
(ii) 
Term loan component : 
1st Year : Cost of 1 +1 Dairy Unit 
: 
₹ 1,00,000 
: Purchase of Tractor 
: 
₹ 6,00,000 
Total term loan amount ….(B) 
₹ 7,00,000 
 
Maximum Permissible Limit / 
Kisan Credit Card Limit (A) +(B) 
 
 
: 
 
 
₹ 11,09,000 
Drawing Limit will be reduced every year based on repayment schedule of the term 
loan(s) availed and withdrawals will be allowed up to the drawing limit. 

 
44 
 
 
Illustration II 
Assessment of KCC LIMIT 
1. 
Marginal farmer cultivating single crop in a year 
1. 
Assumptions : 
1. 
Land holding : 1 acre 
2. 
Crops grown : Paddy (Scale of finance plus crop insurance per acre : ₹ 11,000) 
3. 
There is no change in Cropping Pattern for 5 years 
4. 
Allied Activities to be financed - One Non-Descript Milch Animal ( Unit Cost Rs : 
15,000) 
2. 
Assessment of Card Limit : 
(i) 
Crop loan Component 
(Cost of cultivation for 1 acre of Paddy) 
: 
₹ 11,000 
Add : 10% towards post-harvest / household expense / 
consumption 
: 
₹ 1,100 
Add : 20% towards farm maintenance 
 
: 
₹ 2,200 
Total 
Crop 
Loan 
limit 
for 
1st 
year 
….(A1) 
: 
₹ 14,300 
(ii) 
Term Loan Component 
Cost 
of 
One 
Milch 
Animal 
….(B) 
: 
₹ 15,000 
1st Year Composite KCC Limit : (A1) + (B) 
: 
₹ 29,300 
2nd Year : 
 
 
Crop loan component : 
 
 
A1 plus 10% of crop loan limit (A1) towards cost 
escalation / increase in scale of finance [14,300+(10% 
of 
14300 
= 
1430)] 
….(A2) 
: 
₹ 15,730 
2nd Year Composite KCC Limit : A2+B (15730 + 
15000) 
: 
₹ 30,730 
3rd Year : 
 
 
Crop loan component : 
 
 
A2 plus 10% of crop loan limit (A2) towards cost 
escalation / increase in scale of finance [15,730+(10% 
of 
15730 
= 
1570)] 
….(A3) 
: 
₹ 17,300 
3rd Year Composite KCC Limit : A3+B (17,300 + 
15,000) 
: 
₹ 32,300 

 
45 
 
4th Year : 
 
 
Crop loan component : 
 
 
A3 plus 10% of crop loan limit (A3) towards cost 
escalation / increase in scale of finance [17,300+(10% 
of 
17300 
= 
1730)] 
….(A4) 
: 
₹ 19,030 
4th Year Composite KCC Limit : A4+B (19,030 + 
15,000) 
 
₹ 34,030 
5th Year : 
 
 
Crop loan component : 
 
 
A4 plus 10% of crop loan limit (A4) towards cost 
escalation / increase in scale of finance [19,030+(10% 
of 
19,03 
0 
= 
1,900)] 
….(A5) 
: 
₹ 20,930 
5th Year Composite KCC Limit : A5+B (20,930 + 
15,000) 
 
₹35,930 
 
Maximum Permissible Limit / 
Composite 
KCC 
Limi 
Say 
 
 
: 
 
 
Rs.36,000 
Note: All the above costs estimated are illustrative in nature. The 
recommended scale of finance / unit costs may be taken into account while 
finalising the credit limit. 
 
 

 
46 
 
Delivery Channels - Technical features 
1 
Issue of cards 
The beneficiaries under the scheme will be issued with a Smart card / Debit card (Biometric smart 
card compatible for use in the ATMs / Hand held Swipe Machines and capable of storing adequate 
information on farmers identity, assets, land holdings and credit profile etc.). All KCC holders should 
be provided with any one or a combination of the following types of cards : 
2 
Type of Card : 
A magnetic stripe card with PIN (Personal Identification Number) with an ISO IIN (International 
Standards Organization International Identification Number) to enable access to all banks ATMs and 
micro ATMs 
In cases where the Banks would want to utilize the centralized biometric authentication infrastructure 
of the UIDAI (Aadhaar authentication), debit cards with magnetic stripe and PIN with ISO IIN with
biometric authentication of UIDAI can be provided. 
Debit Cards with magnetic stripe and only biometric authentication can also be provided depending 
on customer base of the bank. Till such time, UIDAI becomes widespread, if the banks want to get 
started without inter-operability using their existing centralized bio metric infrastructure, banks may 
do so. 
Banks may choose to issue EMV (Europay, MasterCard and VISA, a global standard for 
interoperation of integrated circuit cards) and RUPAY compliant chip cards with magnetic stripe and 
pin with ISO IIN. 
Further, the biometric authentication and smart cards may follow the common open standards 
prescribed by IDRBT and IBA. This will enable them to transact seamlessly with input dealers as 
also enable them to have the sales proceeds credited to their accounts when they sell their output at 
mandies, procurement centers, etc. 
3 
Delivery Channels : 
The following delivery channels shall be put in place to start with so that the Kisan Credit Card is 
used by the farmers to effectively transact their operations in their KCC account. 
1. 
Withdrawal through ATMs / Micro ATM 
2. 
Withdrawal through BCs using smart cards. 

 
47 
 
3. 
PoS machine through input dealers 
4. 
Mobile Banking with IMPS capabilities / IVR 
4. 
Mobile Banking / Other Channels : 
Provide Mobile banking functionality for KCC Cards / Accounts as well along with Interbank Mobile 
Payment Service (IMPS of NPCI) capability to allow customers to use this inter-operable IMPS for 
funds transfer between banks and also to do merchant payment transactions as additional capability 
for purchases of agricultural inputs. 
This mobile banking should ideally be on Unstructured Supplementary Data (USSD) platform for 
wider and safer acceptance. However, the banks can also offer this on other fully encrypted modes 
(application based or SMS based) to make use of the recent relaxation on transaction limits. Banks 
can also offer unencrypted mobile banking subject to RBI regulations on transaction limits. 
It is necessary that Mobile based transaction platforms enabling transactions in the KCC use easy to 
use SMS based solution with authentication thru' MPIN. Such solutions also need to be enabled on 
IVR in local language to ensure transparency and security. Such mobile based payment systems 
should be encouraged by all the banks by creating awareness and by doing proper customer 
education. 
With the existing infrastructure available with banks, all KCC holders should be provided with any 
one or a combination of the following types of cards : 
* 
Debit cards (magnetic stripe card with PIN) enabling farmers to operate the limit 
through all banks ATMs / Micro ATMs 
* 
Debit Cards with magnetic stripe and biometric authentication. 
* 
Smart cards for doing transactions through PoS machines held by Business 
Correspondents, input dealers, traders and Mandies. 
* 
EMV compliant chip cards with magnetic stripe and pin with ISO IIN. 
In addition, the banks having a call centre / Inter active Voice Response (IVR), may provide SMS 
based mobile banking with a call back facility from bank for mobile PIN (MPIN) verification through 
IVR, thus making a secured SMS based mobile banking facility available to card holders. 
 
 

 
48 
 
SECTION – II. Relief Measure By Banks In Areas Affected By Natural Calamities 
 
BACKGROUND 
2.1 Periodical but frequent occurrence of natural calamity takes a heavy toll on human life 
and cause wide spread damage to economic pursuits in one or the other part of the country. 
The devastation caused by natural calamities calls for massive rehabilitation effort from all 
agencies. The Central, State and local authorities draw programmes on economic 
rehabilitation for the people affected by natural calamities. The developmental role assigned 
to the commercial banks including Small Finance Banks warrant their active support in 
reviving the economic activities of those affected by the occurrence of a natural calamity. 
2.2 In terms of the National Disaster Management Framework, there are two funds 
constituted viz. National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) and State Disaster Response 
Fund (SDRF) for providing relief in the affected areas. This framework currently recognizes 
12 types of natural calamities viz. cyclone, drought, earthquake, fire, flood, tsunami, 
hailstorm, landslide, avalanche, cloud burst, pest attack and cold wave/frost. Out of these 
12, for 4 calamities i.e. drought, hailstorms, pest attack and cold wave/frost, the Ministry of 
Agriculture is the nodal point and for the remaining 8, the Ministry of Home Affairs is the 
nodal ministry to make the necessary administrative arrangements. A slew of measures for 
relief are undertaken by the Sovereign (Central/State Government) from time to time to 
provide relief to the affected people including, inter alia, provision for input subsidies, 
financial assistance to farmers including small and marginal farmers. 
2.3 The role of the scheduled commercial banks including Small Finance Banks (SFBs) is to 
provide relief measure through rescheduling existing loans and sanctioning fresh loans as 
per the emerging requirement of the borrowers. To enable banks to take uniform and 
concerted action expeditiously, these directions are issued covering four aspects viz. (i) 
Institutional Framework (ii) Restructuring of Existing Loans (iii) Providing Fresh Loans and 
(iv) Other Ancillary Relief Measures. 
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK 
3.1 Establishing Policy/Procedures for dealing with Natural Calamities 
The area, time of occurrence and intensity of the natural calamity cannot be anticipated. It is, 
therefore, imperative that banks have a blueprint of action duly approved by the Board of 
Directors for such eventualities so that the required relief and assistance is provided with 

 
49 
 
utmost speed and without any loss of time. Further, all Divisional/Zonal Offices and branches 
of Scheduled Commercial/Small Finance banks should be familiar with these standing 
instructions. These standing instructions will immediately come to force after the district/state 
authorities put in place the requisite declaration. It is essential that these instructions should 
also be made available to the State Government authorities and all the District Collectors so 
that all concerned are aware about the action that should be taken by the concerned 
authorities in the affected area. 
3.2 Discretionary Powers to Divisional / Zonal Manager of banks 
The Divisional/Zonal Managers of scheduled commercial/SF banks must be vested with 
certain discretionary powers to avoid the need to seek fresh approval from their Central 
Office regarding the line of action decided by the District Consultative Committee/State Level 
Bankers’ Committee. Some of the areas, among others where such discretionary powers are 
vital may be the adoption of scale of finance, extension of loan period, margin, security, 
sanction of new loan keeping in view the total liability of the borrower arising out of the old 
loan where the asset financed is damaged or lost due to the natural calamity and the new 
loan financed for creation/repair of such asset(s). 
3.3 Meeting of State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC)/District Consultative 
Committee (DCC) 
3.3.1 In the event of an occurrence of a natural calamity which covers a larger part of a 
State, the State Level Bankers’ Committee convener bank should convene a meeting 
immediately. The committee, in collaboration with the State Government authorities should 
evolve a coordinated action plan for implementing the relief programme. If the calamity has 
affected only a small part of the state/few districts, the convener of the District Consultative 
Committee of the affected district(s) should convene a meeting immediately. In the special 
SLBC/DCC meeting, the position of the affected areas may be assessed so as to ensure 
speedy formulation and implementation of suitable relief measures. 
3.3.2 In the areas where the calamity is severe, the relief measure(s) implemented should be 
reviewed periodically through a specially constituted Task Force/Sub-Committee by way of 
weekly/fortnightly meetings as decided by the SLBC/DCC. 
 
 

 
50 
 
3.4 Declaration of Natural Calamity 
3. 4.1 It is recognised that declaration of a natural calamity is in the domain of the Sovereign 
(Central / State Governments). The inputs received from the State Governments reveal that 
there are no uniform procedures being followed for declaration of natural calamity and issue 
of declarations / certificates. These declarations/certificates are called by different names 
such as Annewari, Paisewari, Girdawari, etc. in different States. Nevertheless, the common 
thread to extend relief measures including reschedulement of loans by banks, is that the 
crop loss assessed should be 33% or more. For assessing this loss, while some States 
are conducting crop cutting experiments to determine the loss in crop yield, some others are 
relying on the eye estimates/visual impressions. 
3.4.2 In case of extreme situations such as wide-spread floods, etc. when it is largely clear 
that most of the standing crops have been damaged and/or land and other assets have 
suffered a wide-spread damage, the matter be deliberated by State Government/District 
Authorities in the especially convened SLBC/DCC meetings where the concerned 
Government functionary/District Collector may explain the reasons for not estimating 
‘Annewari’ (percentage of crop loss – by whatever name called) through crop cutting 
experiments and that the decision to provide relief for the affected populace needs to be 
taken based on the eye estimate/visual impressions. 
3.4.3 In both the cases, however, DCCs/SLBC have to satisfy themselves fully that the crop 
loss has been 33% or more before acting on these pronouncements. 
RESTRUCTURUNG OF EXISTING LOANS 
In the event of a natural calamity, the repaying capacity of the people gets severely affected 
due to the disruption of their economic activities and loss of economic assets. Therefore, 
relief in loan repayment, by restructuring the existing loan may become necessary. 
4.1. Agriculture Loans: Short-term Production Credit (Crop Loans) 
4.1.1 All short-term loans, except those which are overdue at the time of occurrence of 
natural calamity, should be eligible for restructuring. The principal amount of the short-
term loan as well as interest due for repayment in the year of occurrence of the natural 
calamity may be converted into term loan. 
4.1.2 The repayment period of the restructured loan may vary depending on the severity 
of the calamity, the impact on loss of economic assets and distress it caused. A 

 
51 
 
maximum repayment period of up to 2 years (including the moratorium period of 1 year) 
should be allowed if the loss is between 33% and 50%. If the crop loss is 50% or more, 
repayment period may be extended upto a maximum of 5 years (including the 1 year 
moratorium period). 
4.1.3 In all restructured loan accounts, moratorium period of at least one year should be 
considered. Banks should also not insist on additional collateral security for such 
restructured loans. 
4.2 Agriculture Loans: Long term (Investment) Credit 
4.2.1 The existing term loan installments should be rescheduled keeping in view the 
repaying capacity of the borrower and the nature of natural calamity viz. 
 
4.2.1.1 Natural Calamities where only crop for that year is damaged and productive 
assets are not damaged. 
4.2.1.2 Natural Calamities where the productive assets are partially or totally 
damaged and borrowers are in need of a new loan. 
4.2.1.3 In regard to natural calamity under category (4.2.1.1) above, the banks may 
reschedule the payment of installment during the year of natural calamity and extend 
the loan period by one year. Under this arrangement the installments defaulted 
willfully in earlier years will not be eligible for rescheduling. The banks may also have 
to postpone payment of interest by borrowers. 
4.2.1.4 In regard to category (4.2.1.2) i.e. where the borrower’s assets are 
partially/totally damaged, the rescheduling by way of extension of loan period may be 
determined on the basis of overall repaying capacity of the borrower vis-a-vis his total 
liability (old term loan, restructured crop loan, if any and the fresh crop/term loan 
being given) less the subsidies received from the Government agencies, 
compensation available under the insurance schemes, etc. While the total repayment 
period for the restructured/fresh term loan will differ on case-to-case basis, generally 
it should not exceed a period of 5 years. 
4.3 Other Loans 
4.3.1 A view needs to be taken by SLBC/DCC depending on the severity of the calamity 
as to whether a general reschedulement of all other loans (i.e. besides the agriculture 
loans as indicated above) such as loans granted for allied activities and loans given to 
rural artisans, traders, micro/small industrial units or in case of extreme situations, 

 
52 
 
medium enterprises is required. If such a decision is taken, while recovery of all the 
loans be postponed by the specified period, banks will have to assess the requirement of 
the individual borrowers in each such case and depending on the nature of his account, 
repayment capacity and the need for the fresh loans, appropriate decisions shall be 
taken by the individual banks 
4.3.2 The primary consideration before the banks in extending credit to any unit for its 
rehabilitation should be based on the viability of the venture after the rehabilitation 
programme is implemented. 
4.4 Asset Classification 
The asset classification status of the restructured loans will be as under: 
4.4.1 The restructured portion of the short term as well as long-term loans may be 
treated as current dues and need not be classified as NPA. The asset classification of 
these term loans would thereafter be governed by the revised terms and conditions. 
Nevertheless, banks are required to make higher provisions for such restructured 
standard advances as prescribed by Department of Banking Regulation7 from time to 
time. 
4.4.2. The asset classification for the remaining dues, which does not form a part of the 
restructured portion, will continue to be governed by the original terms and conditions of 
its sanction. Consequently, the dues from the borrower shall be classified by the lending 
bank under different asset classification categories viz. standard, sub-standard, doubtful 
and loss. 
4.4.3. Additional finance, if any, shall be treated as “standard asset” and its future asset 
classification will be governed by the terms and conditions of its sanction. 
4.4.4. With the objective to ensure that banks are proactive in extending relief to the 
affected persons, the benefit of asset classification of the restructured account as on the 
date of natural calamity will be available only if the restructuring is completed within a 
period of three months from the date of natural calamity. In the event of extreme 
calamity, when the SLBC/DCC is of the view that this period will not be sufficient for the 
banks to reschedule all the affected loans, it should immediately approach the concerned 
Regional Office of RBI detailing the reasons for seeking extension. Such requests will be 
considered on the merit of each case. 
 
7 DBR’s Master Directions on Prudential Guidelines on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and 
Provisioning 

 
53 
 
4.4.5 The accounts that are restructured for the second time or more on account of 
recurrence of natural calamities should retain the same asset classification category on 
restructuring. Accordingly, for a restructured standard asset, the subsequent 
restructuring necessitated on account of natural calamity would not be treated as 
second restructuring, i.e., the standard asset classification will be allowed to be 
maintained. However, all other restructuring norms will apply. 
4.5 Utilization of Insurance Proceeds 
4.5.1 While the above measures relating to rescheduling of loans are intended to provide 
relief to the farmers, the insurance proceeds should, ideally, compensate their losses. In 
terms of orders issued by the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers 
Welfare, the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) has, replaced the existing 
schemes of National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) & Modified National 
Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS) with effect from Kharif 2016. Under the scheme 
all agriculture loans are provided insurance cover for all stages of the crop cycle 
including post-harvest risks in specified instances. Farmers’ details are required to be 
entered by banks in the unified portal for crop insurance which is available at www.agri-
insurance.gov.in in order to facilitate assessment of coverage of crops insured, 
premiums deducted, etc. 
4.5.2 While restructuring the loans in areas affected by a natural calamity, banks should 
also take into account the insurance proceeds, if any, receivable from the Insurance 
Company. They should adjust these proceeds to the ‘restructured accounts’ in cases 
where they have granted fresh loan to the borrower. However, banks should act with 
empathy and consider restructuring and granting fresh loans without waiting for the 
receipt of insurance claim, in cases where there is reasonable certainty of receiving the 
claim. 
 
PROVIDING FRESH LOANS 
5.1 Sanctioning of Fresh Loans 
5.1.1 Once the decision to reschedule loans is taken by SLBC/DCC, pending conversion 
of short-term loans, banks shall grant fresh crop loan to the affected people based on the 
scale of finance for the crop and the cultivation area, as per the extant guidelines8. 
 
8 Master circular on Kisan Credit card Scheme available @ www.rbi.org.in 

 
54 
 
5.1.2 The bank assistance in agriculture and allied activities (poultry, fishery, animal 
husbandry, etc.) may also be needed for long term loans for a variety of purposes such 
as repair of existing economic asset(s) and/or acquisition of new asset(s). Similarly, rural 
artisans, self-employed persons, micro and small industrial units, etc. in the areas 
affected by a natural calamity may require fresh credit to sustain their livelihood. Banks 
should assess the need and decide on the quantum of loans to be granted to the 
affected borrowers taking into consideration, amongst others, their credit requirement 
and the due procedure for sanctioning loans. 
5.1.3. Banks shall also grant consumption loan up to ₹ 10,000/- to existing borrowers 
without any collateral. The limit may, however, be enhanced beyond ₹10,000/- at the 
bank’s discretion. 
5.2 Terms and Conditions 
5.2.1 Guarantee, Security and Margin 
5.2.1.1 Credit should not be denied for want of personal guarantees. Where the 
bank’s existing security has been eroded because of damage or destruction by 
floods, assistance will not be denied merely for want of additional fresh security. The 
fresh loan shall be granted even if the value of security (existing as well as the asset 
to be acquired from the new loan) is less than the loan amount. For fresh loans, a 
sympathetic view will have to be taken. 
5.2.1.2 Where the crop loan (which has been converted into term loan) was earlier 
sanctioned against personal security/hypothecation of crop and the borrower is not 
able to offer charge/mortgage of land as security for the converted loan, she/he 
should not be denied conversion facility merely on the ground of his/her inability to 
furnish land as security. If the borrower has already taken a term loan against 
mortgage/charge on land, the bank should be content with a second charge for the 
converted term loan. Banks should not insist on third party guarantee for providing 
conversion facility. 
5.2.1.3 Where land is taken as security, in the absence of original title record, a 
certificate issued by the Revenue Department officials may be accepted for financing 
to farmers who have lost proof of their title such as title deed or registration certificate 
issued to registered share-croppers. 
5.2.1.4 Margin requirements may be waived or the grant/subsidy given by the 
concerned State Government may be considered as margin. 
 

 
55 
 
5.3 Rate of Interest 
The rates of interest will be in accordance with the directives of the Reserve Bank. Within the 
areas of their discretion, however, banks are expected to take a sympathetic view of the 
difficulties of the borrowers and extend a concessional treatment to calamity-affected people. 
In respect of current dues in default, no penal interest will be charged. The banks should 
also suitably defer the compounding of interest charges. Banks may not levy any penal 
interest and consider waiving penal interest, if any, already charged in regard to the loans 
converted/rescheduled. Depending on the nature and severity of natural calamity, the SLBC/ 
DCC shall take a view on the interest rate concession that could be extended to borrowers 
so that there is uniformity in approach among banks in providing relief. 
OTHER ANCILLARY MEASURES 
6.1 Relaxation on Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms 
It needs to be recognized that many persons displaced or adversely affected by a major 
calamity may not have access to their normal identification and personal records. In such 
cases a small account based on the photograph and signature or thumb impression 
rendered in front of the bank official shall be opened. The above instructions will be 
applicable to cases where the balance in the account does not exceed ₹ 50,000/- or the 
amount of relief granted (if higher) and the total credit in the account does not exceed ₹1, 
00,000/- or the amount of relief granted, (if higher) in a year. 
6.2 Providing access to Banking Service 
6.2.1 Banks may operate its natural calamity affected branches from temporary premises 
under advice to the concerned Regional Office of RBI. For continuing the temporary premise 
beyond 30 days, banks may obtain specific approval from the concerned Regional Office of 
RBI. Banks may also make arrangements to render banking services in the affected areas 
by setting up satellite offices, extension counters or mobile banking facilities etc. under 
intimation to RBI. 
6.2.2 To meet the immediate cash requirement of the affected people, due importance may 
be given towards restoring the ATMs or other alternate arrangements maybe provided to 
avail such facilities. 
6.2.3 Other measures that banks may initiate at their discretion to alleviate the condition of 
the affected people could be waiving ATM fees, increasing ATM withdrawal limits; waiving 

 
56 
 
overdraft fees/early withdrawal penalty on time deposits /late fee for credit card/other loan 
instalment payments etc. and giving option to credit card holders to convert their outstanding 
balance to EMIs repayable in 1-2 years. Besides, all charges debited to the farm loan 
account other than the normal interest may be waived considering the hardship caused to 
the affected people. 
RIOTS AND DISTURBANCES: APPLICABILITY OF THE GUIDELINES 
7. Applicability of the guidelines in case of riots and disturbances 
7.1 Whenever RBI advises the banks to extend rehabilitation assistance to the riot/ 
disturbance affected persons, the aforesaid guidelines may broadly be followed by banks for 
the purpose. It should, however, be ensured that only genuine persons, duly identified by the 
State Administration as having been affected by the riots/ disturbances, are provided 
assistance as per the guidelines. 
7.2. The issuance of advice to the banks by Reserve Bank of India on receipt of request/ 
information from State Government and thereafter issue of instructions by banks to their 
branches generally results in delay in extending the assistance to riot-affected people. With 
a view to ensuring quick relief to the affected persons, it has been decided that the District 
Collector, on occurrence of the riots/ disturbances, may ask the Lead Bank Officer to 
convene a meeting of the DCC, if necessary and submit a report to the DCC on the extent of 
damage caused to life and property in the area affected by riots/disturbances. If the DCC is 
satisfied that there has been extensive loss to life and property on account of the riots/ 
disturbances, the relief as per the above guidelines may be extended to the people affected 
by the riots/ disturbances. In certain cases, where there are no District Consultative 
Committees, the District Collector may request the convener of the State Level Bankers’ 
Committee of the State to convene a meeting of the bankers to consider extension of relief 
to the affected persons. The report submitted by the Collector and the decision thereon of 
DCC/ SLBC may be recorded and should form a part of the minutes of the meeting. A copy 
of the proceedings of the meeting may be forwarded to the concerned Regional Office of the 
Reserve Bank of India. 
 
 

 
57 
 
SECTION–III. Credit Flow To Agriculture-Agricultural Loans-Waiver Of Margin/Security 
Requirements 
 
Keeping in view the importance of flow of credit to agriculture, in particular to the smaller 
borrowers, banks may waive margin/security requirements for agricultural loans upto Rs 1 
lakh and in the case of agri-business and agri-clinics for loans upto Rs. 5 lakh. 
 
 

 
58 
 
CHAPTER VII: PARTICIPATION UNDER LEAD BANK SCHEME 
 
Small Finance Banks may be invited to SLBC meetings in their respective locations. For the 
current year (2017-18), they will be only invitees to these meetings and would not be a part 
of the credit planning exercise. 
Small Finance Banks will be part of the credit planning exercise from the financial year 2018-
19. Accordingly, in the respective locations, they will be participating in various fora of the 
lead bank scheme i.e. SLBC, DLCC/DLRC and BLBC as a regular member from the first 
quarter of 2018-19. 
Small Finance Banks may refer to the Master Circular on Lead Bank Scheme dated July 3, 
2017 to obtain an understanding of the structure of the various fora and functioning of Lead 
Bank Scheme which is available on RBI website: www.rbi.org.in. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
59 
 
CHAPTER VIII: GOVERNMENT SPONSORED SCHEMES 
Credit Facilities To SC/ST and Minority Communities 
SFBs will become part of credit planning exercise under Lead Bank Scheme from the year 
2018-19. The following Master Circulars relating to NRLM, NULM, Credit facilities to 
SCs/STs and Minorities will be fully applicable to SFBs with effect from April 1, 2018. 
i. 
Master Circular – Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural Livelihoods Mission 
(DAY-NRLM) RBI/2017-18/10– FIDD.GSSD.CO.BC.No.04/09.01.01/2017-18 dated 
July 1, 2017 
ii. 
Master Circular – Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Urban Livelihoods 
Mission (DAY-NRLM) RBI/2017-18/5 – FIDD.GSSD.CO.BC.No.03/09.16.03/2017-18 
dated July 1, 2017 
iii. 
Master Circular – Credit facilities to Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes 
(STs) – RBI/2017-18/7 – FIDD.CO.GSSD.BC.No.06/09.09.01/2017-18 July 1, 2017 
iv. 
Master Circular – Credit facilities to Minority Communities – RBI/2017-18/6 – 
FIDD.GSSD. BC.No.05/09.10.01/2017-18 dated July 1, 2017 
Small Finance Banks may refer to the above Master Circulars to obtain an understanding of 
the schemes and the reporting mechanism prescribed thereunder. The Master Circulars are 
available under the following link in the website of RBI. 
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_ViewMasterCirculardetails.aspx?did=343